Document process instance migration phase 5 (#5041)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/components/concepts/process-instance-migration.md

While we're working on resolving this, you can migrate this case by providing a mapping between the boundary events.
:::

### Compensation Boundary Events
### Compensation boundary events

Compensation boundary events can be migrated similarly to other catch events, with one exception. If a compensation boundary event is added, a new compensation subscription is only opened for activity instances that are currently active, or haven't been started yet. For activity instances that have already finished, no new compensation subscription will be opened.

Compensation boundary events can be migrated similarly to other catch events, with one exception.
If a compensation boundary event is added, a new compensation subscription is only opened for activity instances that are currently active, or haven't been started yet.

> For activity instances that have already finished no new compensation subscription will be opened.

Reviewer: ❓ @conceptualshark Is there any specific reason to join the sentences on one line?

🔧 Personally, I believe separate lines lead to easier to review changes:
- changes in git/github can only be reviewed per line
  - if you change one or a few words in a sentence, git will simply show the entire line
  - for long lines this means that it's not always clear what changes were made without reading the entire line
  - in this case that involves reading multiple sentences
- so we can simplify reviews by placing separate sentences on individual lines
  - this means less text to read to find the differences
  - placing a sentence completely on a single line means the whole context is available (i.e. I'm not in favor of arbitrary cut-offs of sentences)
- markdown automatically formats text across multiple lines as a single paragraph
  - so this does not change the rendered text

While we're working on resolving this, you can migrate this case by providing a mapping between the boundary events.
:::

## Compensation Boundary Events

> Migrating compensation boundary events requires explicit mapping instructions to decide whether to preserve, remove, or create a compensation subscription like any other catch event.

Author: @korthout 

> Compensation boundary events always require a mapping instruction

It is possible not to provide a mapping instruction for a compensation event that has a subscription in the state. Then, compensation subscription will be removed in the target definition.

❓ The other catch events don't require explicit mapping instructions. Whether you map them or not changes the migration behavior for that catch event. It's thus not clear what is meant by this sentence. Which do you mean?

I think, requires here makes the meaning ambiguous. I can update it to:

```markdown
Compensation boundary events can be migrated similarly to other catch events. If a mapping instruction is provided, the compensation boundary event will be migrated accordingly. However, if no mapping instruction is specified, the event subscription will be removed after migration.
```

While being that, it is important to understand the behaviour of creating compensation event subscription in the target process.

> New compensation boundary events contained in the target process definition only will take effect for activity instances that are not started or not finished yet.

Author: I still find it useful to keep the emphasis on the creation. We can merge them as follows:
```markdown
While being that, it is important to understand the behaviour of the compensation event subscription creation after the migration. 
If a compensation boundary event is added, a new compensation subscription is only opened for activity instances that are currently active, or haven't been started yet. 
For activity instances that have already finished no new compensation subscription will be opened.
```

Consider the following example where the instance waiting on service task `B`:

![The instance waiting on service task B.](assets/process-instance-migration/migration-compensation_before.png)

The target process definition contains a compensation boundary event attached to service task `B`:

![The target process definition contains a compensation boundary event attached to service task B.](assets/process-instance-migration/migration-compensation_after.png)

If the process instance is migrated by providing mapping instruction between service tasks `A` -> `C`, then triggering compensation throw event afterward is **not** going to compensate `B`.

> However, if the process instance is migrated by providing mapping instruction between service tasks `A` -> `B`, the compensation subscription will be created on completion of the element `B`.

Author: Updated 👍

## Gateways

The migration tool now accommodates several scenarios for gateways involving parallel gateways and inclusive gateways.
Active parallel and inclusive gateways—especially those with incidents (such as from invalid execution listeners or failed jobs)—can be migrated similarly to other active elements.
Additionally, the migration tool supports migrating joining gateways.

### Migrating joining parallel and inclusive gateways

> Joining parallel and inclusive gateways with active incoming sequence flows are active elements that must have a mapping instruction similar to any other active element.

Reviewer: ❌ In the specific case that we care about these gateways are not active yet because not all incoming sequence flows have been taken.

```suggestion
Joining parallel and inclusive gateways with taken incoming sequence flows that are still waiting for more incoming sequence flows require a mapping instruction similar to active elements.
```

For migrating joining gateways, following conditions must hold:

- Joining gateway in the process instance must be mapped to the target gateway.
- The target gateway must have at least the same number of incoming sequence flows as the source gateway.

> - Taken sequence flow ids must exist in the target process definition and flow to the target gateway.

Reviewer: 👍 Great description!

Consider following example:
The process instance is waiting at the joining parallel gateway with one of the incoming sequence flows is taken as the element `A` is completed.
Please note that element `B` is still active and waiting at the user task.

![The instance waiting on joining gateway.](assets/process-instance-migration/migration-joining-gateway-before.png)

Mapping the active element `B` to the target element `B` and the joining parallel gateway instance to the target joining parallel gateway will migrate the process instance to the target process definition.
Please note that, taken sequence flow (from element `A` to joining gateway) must exist in the target process definition and flow to the target gateway.
After the migration, the process instance will look like following:

> ![The instance waiting on service task B.](assets/process-instance-migration/migration-joining-gateway-after.png)

Reviewer: 👍 Great example!

As can be seen in the example above, another element `C` is added before the joining gateway in the target process definition.
To complete the process instance after the migration, element `C` must be completed.

> Process instance modification can be used to active element `C` and complete it to reach the target gateway.

Reviewer: 🔧 Here we could link to the process instance modification concept.

> Process instance modification can be used to active element `C` and complete it to reach the target gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Process instance modification can be used to activate element `C` and complete it to reach the target gateway.
```

While we're working on resolving this, you can migrate this case by providing a mapping between the boundary events.
:::

### Compensation Boundary Events

> Compensation boundary events can be migrated similarly to other catch events.
> If a mapping instruction is provided, the compensation boundary event will be migrated accordingly.
> However, if no mapping instruction is specified, the event subscription will be removed after migration.
> 
> While being that, it is important to understand the behaviour of the compensation event subscription creation after the migration.
> If a compensation boundary event is added, a new compensation subscription is only opened for activity instances that are currently active, or haven't been started yet.

Reviewer: 🔧 I still feel like we can condense this:

```suggestion
Compensation boundary events can be migrated similarly to other catch events, with one exception.
If a compensation boundary event is added, a new compensation subscription is only opened for activity instances that are currently active, or haven't been started yet.
```

For activity instances that have already finished no new compensation subscription will be opened.
Consider the following example where the instance is waiting on service task `A`:

![The instance waiting on service task A.](assets/process-instance-migration/migration-compensation_before.png)

> The target process definition contains a compensation boundary event attached to service task `B`:

Reviewer: ❌ After the updates, I think you forgot about changing this one.

```suggestion
The target process definition contains a compensation boundary event attached to service task `A`:
```

![The target process definition contains a compensation boundary event attached to service task A.](assets/process-instance-migration/migration-compensation_after.png)

If the process instance is migrated by providing mapping instruction between service tasks `A` -> `A`, the compensation subscription will be created on completion of the element `A`.

> However, if the process instance is migrated by providing mapping instruction between service tasks `A` -> `B`, then triggering compensation throw event afterward is **not** going to compensate `A`.

Reviewer: 🔧 We could mention why this is the case:
```suggestion
However, if the process instance is migrated by providing mapping instruction between service tasks `A` -> `B`, then triggering compensation throw event afterward is **not** going to compensate `A`.
This is because the subscription is only opened when completing a task with a compensation boundary event.
```

Author: Nice one! 🚀
